# With reference to a river catchment that you have studied, assess the potential factors which can impact upon the flood hydrograph.

The catchment of the Beck, over 68km2 consists of impermeable gritstones and limestones. The river drains an area of the North Yorkshire Moors with a mixed use land cover. In the heandwaters there is moorland, and there is arable farming in the lower catchment. On many of the slopes around there are extensive areas of coniferous woodland. As a result, the flood hydrograph shows that there is a highly variable discharge of the river, both from year to year and within a year. When it rains there can be a high degree of flashiness of discharge, shown by a steep rising limb and a high peak discharge causing flooding.

The large flat moorland plateau receives a lot of precipitation; steep valley sides deliver this quickly to the river and the flat valley floor, which broadens at Pickecing, allowing water to spread out. Land management practices such as overgrazing, cultivation and forestry and moorland drainage have reduced the river catchments natural water storage capacity. 

To counteract this, a flood management scheme has adopted a policy called ‘Slowing the flow’. The aim of this scheme is to reduce the severity of flooding in the town by spreading peak flows over a longer period during a flood. The project is likely to result in other benefits in addition to reduced flow, for example increased biodiversity, improved water quality and greater community involvement.

Three main principles have been used within the scheme. Firstly, to slow water at the top of the catchment by using several man-made woody debris dams to delay runoff from the moorland and through the forests. Secondly, to store water in the middle catchment by planting riparian woodland along river margins, characterised by hydrophilic plants such as alder and willow trees. And thirdly, to improve water flow passing through the lower part of the catchment. This was achieved by constructing a bund, creating a large, raised reservoir during high discharges. A concrete control structure positioned in the centre of the bund restricts the flow of water downstream to Pickering to the target (safe) rate of 14.5m3/s (14.5 cumecs). These combined measures will impact the hydrograph by making it less flashy, and so reduce the risk of flooding in Pickering from a 25% chance in any year to less than 4%.

So, the two main factors impacting the flood hydrograph on Pickering Beck are physical, or natural, factors which determine what the river would do if it were to be left to itself, creating a flashy flood hydrograph. And, secondly, human factors of flood management which will dampen, or reduce, the impact of the natural factors and make the flood hydrograph smoother and less flashy.
