Tropical rainforests are located in low latitudinal areas (up to ten degrees north and south). The Amazon Basin has the largest area of rainforest in the world. The Amazonian climate is hot and wet; for example, at Uaupes in Brazil on the equator, mean monthly temperatures range between 25 and 27 degrees and rainfall averages 2677mm per annum. Most precipitation occurs as heavy convectional storms and skies are often cloudy. Rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year in the western part of Amazonia, but southern and eastern areas experience a short dry season, although precipitation is still sufficient for rainforest. 

Net Primary Productivity (NPP) is very high; the biome is the most biologically diverse ecosystem in the world. Although estimates vary, there are about 1,300 bird, 428 amphibian, 427 mammal and 378 reptile species, and 3,000 types of fish.
Flora as well as fauna are highly diverse. The vegetation is usually vertically stratified into four layers: emergent, canopy, under-canopy, and shrub and herb (Figure 1). The forest appears to be evergreen because foliage is always present, but only the palm tree grows and sheds its leaves continually. Most trees instead have flushes of growth; for example, the Brazil nut, a dry season deciduous tree, sheds its leaves well before bud break. Others, known as leaf exchangers, shed their leaves while buds break, whereas others lose their leaves after the buds' break.

Many of the world’s tropical forests are under threat from anthropogenic (human) activities. A key direct human impact is the removal of the forest vegetation, which can be partial (degradation), or more comprehensive (deforestation). There are several reasons for this, including clearing land for crops or cattle pasture, urbanisation and building infrastructure such as roads. Indirect human impacts include the warming and drying of these environments driven by global changes in climate, which further threaten vegetation communities. All these perturbations impact the water cycle.

# The water cycle in undisturbed tropical rainforests

Rainfall tends to be high, with frequent and intense rainstorms. The hot temperatures at the equator facilitate high rates of evaporation from seas and oceans, as warm air can hold more moisture. This warm, moist air is then blown on land by prevailing winds and weather systems. The water vapour in the air condenses as the air cools, leading to convectional rainfall events.

In densely vegetated tropical rainforests, a large portion of this rainfall is intercepted by trees and other flora, as raindrops falling towards the ground are caught on their leaves. Much of this intercepted water is evaporated directly back into the atmosphere, meaning it never reaches the underlying land.

The ground surface in tropical rainforests is covered by a litter layer, formed as trees continually shed leaves which fall to the forest floor. This organic matter can decompose rapidly, forming humus. Where soils have well-developed litter and humus layers, water can soak into the soil more easily - infiltration. In tropical rainforests, most of the rain that reaches the ground infiltrates into the soil, with little overland flow across the surface.

Much of the water in the soil is taken up by vegetation. Most forest species have very shallow roots, so they can access water just below the soil surface. This water is moved up through the vegetation and is lost back into the atmosphere as water vapour through the stomata, via the process of transpiration. Any soil water that isn’t taken up by plant roots or evaporated from the soil surface moves slowly through the soil towards streams and rivers as throughflow, maintaining steady river flows.

The water that is evaporated from leaves following interception, transpired by vegetation, or evaporated directly from the soil, re-enters the atmosphere as water vapour. This helps to maintain humid conditions in tropical rainforests, and when the moisture in the air condenses it will fall again as rainfall. In this way, water is ‘recycled’, and can fall many times as rain, each time being returned to the atmosphere as water vapour through evaporation and transpiration. As air continues to be blown inland, this recycling of water means that areas far away from seas and oceans still receive enough rainfall to support the dense forest vegetation.

# The below section examines the impact of disturbances on the water cycle 

Where land is deforested/degraded, natural recycling of water is disrupted. Rain falling in areas where forest vegetation has been removed or replaced with crops, much less water can be intercepted, as fewer leaves catch raindrops, allowing more rainwater to reach the ground. 

Removing forest vegetation means litter and humus layers are reduced. Hence, it is more difficult for water to infiltrate. This is particularly an issue when rainfall intensities are high, with the convectional rainfall events that are common in these environments. This reduced infiltration means that more water will move over the land surface as overland flow, which reaches streams and rivers much more rapidly as opposed to water which travels through the soil via throughflow. Particulary when surfaces dont have much surface vegetation to slow down the flow. Consequently, the risk of flash flooding is increased. 

If crops have replaced forest vegetation, water which infiltrates will be taken up by the roots and will enter the atmosphere as water vapour through evapotranspiration. However rates of evapotranspiration from crops are much lower than rates from forests. Not only are crops less dense than forest vegetation, but there are now fewer plants to transpire, the roots tend to be less expansive, so they are unable to access water deeper in the soil. Therefore instead of re-entering the atmosphere as water vapour, soil water will move towards the river as throughflow, further exacerbating the flood risk. 

The reduction in water evaporated from leaves after being intercepted together with a reduction in transpiration, means that there is much less water vapour being returned to the atmosphere after a rainfall event. This leads to a reduction in humidity. As air masses move inland, they become increasingly arid as they pass over unvegetated areas.

This atmospheric aridity leads to a reduction in rainfall as there is less water vapour in the air to condense. This has serious implications for the health of forest vegetation. The reduction in rainfall means that less water will infiltrate into the soil, so there is less moisture available for plants to take up through their roots. This leads to water stress, whereby the supply of water is not enough to meet demand from the vegetation. Ultimately, this leads to vegetation dieback, as some plants are unable to tolerate the newer drier conditions.

These disruptions to the ecology and hydrology of tropical forests have further implications for these environments and the processes operating within them. Dry soils and vegetation are prone to wildfires, as the likelihood of combustion increases as moisture content decreases. Forest vegetation is also sometimes burnt deliberately, to clear the land for other uses. Whether accidental or intentional, these fires release small soot particles into the atmosphere, which then impact raindrop and cloud characteristics which further inhibits rainfall.

A lack of available moisture also has implications for temperature. As less water falls as rain, the resulting reduction in evaporation and transpiration means that the cooling effect of latent heat transfer is reduced. This leads to further locally intensified warming of the environment, already subject to high temperatures and sensitive to global changes in climate.

Finally, the drying and heating resulting from vegetation loss leads to positive feedback mechanisms. Removal of vegetation reduces atmospheric moisture and increases temperatures as evaporation and transpiration are reduced. Warmer and drier conditions mean that many forest plants are unable to survive, leading to further vegetation loss through dieback, increasing the risk of fire, both of which cause further drying and heating, amplifying the initial effects.

