.TITLE "Assess the relative importance of the physical environment" "and socio-ecomoic factors in determining the health characteristics" "of a local area you have studied"
.PRINTSTYLE TYPESET
.START
.PP
higher income bands are better able to rent properties in east village, with private parks, pumped artifical lakes, privately planted flower gardens, lower income bands, are more likely to occupy council housing, based of an outdated industrial design, not designed to let in maximum sunlight, where reports of damb and mold are, exacerbated by a lack of public parks, such that human geographers argue there is an overwhelming psychological benefit to living in a rental property , SADS, seasonal depressive order - include another statistic about suicide - less respiratory ilness from mould. residents in higher properties are incentivised to explor their privtee parks.

yet, it can be said physical environment more imporatn, london unesco 2018, 9th most polluted city in the world. newham accumulation of car-borne carcinogens, observable affect highest caner rates of 32 london boroughs,

A02 -> Thus regardless of income band - carcinogens affect all income bands.

however, negligible ? olympic park free for most residents, easily commutable by bus and train <- this bit is ao2. and many BETTER sports facilites are heavily subsidiesd. however, to evaluate, newham obesity has infact increased by 23%k

howver those suffering from carinogen efects, nhs waiting time exacerbated by jukmior strike. however, private healthcare are able to offer 7 differnt kinds of chemotheraphy not by nhs, this can be said vastly different heatlh segment the health characteristics through treatment plans, those on higher income bands receive higher quality treatments.

in conclusion, impossible to decouple from each other, such that both are of relative weight and importance, although ti t can be argued... in the long run physical env. holds more wight. yet to counter evaluate, 

ANALYSIS LOSES FOCUS AND CONCLUSION IS UNCLEAR

