# _Evaluate the potential impact of changes in the carbon budget on a tropical rainforest that you have studied_

The carbon budget refers to balances of exchange between four major carbon stores: atmospheric, biospheric, cryospheric and hydrospheric. It currently reveals a net gain of 4.4PgU per year (IPC). Risinly co2 levels alongside other GHGs sucd as methane, in post-industrial times- leads to global warming. Such warming is and will have a significant impact on the Amazonian rainforest.

Firstly, one change is the disruption to atmospheric stores, the impact being an increased likelihood of delta erosion. The net gain in PgU, means the seas cannot sequestern as much carbon. The impact will be changes to the nature of vegetation. Sea levels currently rise by 5mm per annum along the Amazonium delta, increased erosion and flooding are likely to have a substantial impact on the lowest lying areas, potentially destroying the coastal mangrove forests. Upwards of fourty percent of plant species may become unviable in the Amazonian by 2080, large areas of the evergreen tropical forest may be succeeded by mixed forest and savanna grassland vegetation. 

Linking, as the dry season lengthens trees will have more time to dry out, so there is likely to be anincreased incidence of natural forest fires, which further transfers carbon, previously locked in the biosphere

A potential impact of increases in carbon dioxide, through slash and burn ON THE rainforest is taking place in the Amazon rainforest is reduced vegetation.

However, it is now thought that increased amounts of atmospheric co2 means more carbon is available to convert to plant matter through photosynthesis. This extra growth is refrerred to as carbon fertilization. Moreover, the rainforest is incredibly densely populated, some plants cannot compete and are suffocate, with less competition there numbers may increase. However, this extra growth is not boundless, vegetation also requires water, sunlight and nutrients, especialy nitrogen. Without the dense canopy cover, which only permitted 1-3% of light, .means more direct sunlight hits the young vegetatoin, increasing evapotranspiration. The removal of trees dramatically alters the micro climate of one canopy on evapotranspiration, 600 gallons of watre, such that a large scale removal can drastically negatively impact precipitation, which if evapotranspiration exceeds precipitation, flash flooding more likely to wash nutrients.
Increases in the atmospheric carbon store, impact the likelihood of drought *forest fire* and precipitatoin, through deforestation. Previously locked carbon in the *forest fire* 

.PP
Name the potential impact, name the change in the cabron budget, is is a positive/negative feedback? flows, processes, transfers, ues allthese words
Process = Deforestation
Rate of 20,000
Impact: Spatial, Temporal: 20% land lost over 50 years, rate of slowing down?
 Pastoral cattle ranching which directly covers 15% of deforested, 60% in atmosphere from a biospheric store, cows respire contrasted by tree which photosynthesis and sequester carbon. slash and burn cretes, dark soils, as normaly higher temps increased rates of decomposition and uptake of plants mean that natural soil cant sustainable suport.
Monoculture leaches nutrients from soil. after 2 years soil is unusable, a new plot needs to be burned for.
.PP
relatively small contributions to increased carbon dioxide come from deforestation and other land-use change, although the net effect of terrestrial biosphere fluxes is as a sink – approximately an absorption of 2PgC per year
the average increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide from 2003 to 2021 corresponded to 48% of the carbon dioxide emitted by human activity with the remaining 52% removed by the oceans and the terrestrial biosphere.

Carbon budget futures

By 2050, forest die-back because of changing vegetation succession and fire is predicted to result in the amazon regioin becooming a net source of carbon dioxide, rather than a carbon sink, by the year 2050, exacerbating the rate of atmospheric warming.
ok jhttps://dredfern.substack.com/p/the-amazon-rainforest-and-the-carbon-f3://dredfern.substack.com/p/the-amazon-rainforest-and-the-carbon-f3e
MY NOTES:
slash and burn is common in 75% of reported deforestation,

On balance, impacts on the Amazon rainforest are severe. The Amazon, by losing its status as carbon sink, is no longer safeguarded from. However, there are signs of optimism, potential impacts can still be dampened in the shortrun by carbon vegetation, and the long-run allows for new policymakers, primarily President Lula are reversing many of the policies of his predecessor, whichsaw deforestation increase by crack downs on illegal slash and burn. Over recent decades tropical forests j
