# _Evaluate microeconomic and macroeconomic policies that could be used to reduce inequality in the UK_

Expansionary fiscal policy, whereby the government increases expenditure, could reduce inequality. By increasing spending towards "social transfers", claimants disposable incomes increase, particularly those on lower income brackets. This not only stimulates their marginal propensity to consume, it more importantly enables them to fund various aspects of their lives, such as childcare, housing, and basic necessities leading to improvements in quality of life also reducing strain from the cost of living crisis. In addition, increased finance for welfare schemes, relieves strains on services, such as the NHS, e.g. through "reduced waiting times and more available beds". Therefore, it can be said increases in expenditure directly reduce inequality as they proportionately affect those reliant on welfare schems. Yet, due to imperfect information held by government bodies e.g. "ONS", there are many unknowns and assumptions, including but not limited to, which regions/welfare schemes need funding the most and how much?
.PP
Alternatively, increases to the NMW (national minimum wage) reduce inequality. Were the previous NMW of 10.24 to increase, effects similar to increased social transfer could be observed with the added benefit of not relying on increased expenditure. Increased employment income not only reduces income inequality, it also provides the government an increase in income tax revenue, allowing the government to finance more social welfare schemes through expansionary fiscal policy.

NOTES:
    London - 3% of NMW
    NE and NI - 7% of NMW
    UK - 5% NMW
    2.5 million long term sickness
    Costs of living vastly different
    Poverty types
    
    DATA NEEDED:
        LORENZ + GINI + NMW diagram
.PP
No one microeconomic or macroeconomic policy can be used to reduce inequality in the UK. It's important to consider that new governments voted in could overturn said policies, current governments have incentives to choose popular shortermist policies over more - effective long term policies. Given the current information we have (ONS figures etc) it's wiser to employ a combination of policies. For example, increases to the NMW are beneficial as governemnts normally have to pay money to those in work but earning low wages Finally, the many unknowns and assumptions are better foolproofed, through, unintended regressive, none of this is watertight, it may take generations for these policies to properly actualise.
, It may take generations for these policies to actualise,  thus dampening/negating any initial positive effects to begin with
Milton Friedman I think the government solution to a problem is often the worst one, the government cannot factor in all these unknowns and assumptions, excessive administration costs, fraudulent claims to the welfare system
fundementally it is difficult to reduce inequality due to the entrenched nature of intergenerational poverty
friedrich hayek "it is difficult for an economy to mobilise if information is dispered" back up your information claim argument
inertia, habitual behaviour, computation error, moreover, it is releativley difficult to attach a monetary value to 'inequality' it compasses several broad composite measures "hdi"
 i  contractionary fiscal policy may start a deficit, whatever party gets voted in next, in wishing to reduce hte deficit may evidently cut back on spending which would be counter-intuitive to this

