# _Evaluate the potential impact of changes in the carbon budget on a tropical rainforest that you have studied_


The carbon budget refers to balances of exchange between four major carbon stores: atmospheric, biospheric, cryospheric and hydrospheric. It currently reveals a net gain of 4.4PgU per year (IPPC). Carbon dioxide is the most important anthropogenic greenhouse gas, in the sense that, Risinly co2 levels alongside other GHGs sucd as methane, in post-industrial times- leads to global warming. Such warming is and will have a significant impact on the Amazonian rainforest. The Amazonian rainforest lies within the equatorial climate zone  - 
reas of some 8.2 million km2. At present, it acts as a carbon sink absorbing around 35 percent of the worlds annual co2 emissions and produces more than 20 percent of the worlds exyget. It contains the greatest biodiversity providing a habitat for more than half of the worlds estimated ten million species.

Firstly, were the atmospheric carbon store to increase, impacts on the Amazon include the following. Firstly, as the concentration of greenhouse gases increases in the atmosphere, the enhanced greenhouse effect strengthens as greenhouse gases prevent more solar radiation from escaping the atmosphere. This in turn is likely to see an increase of temperature by 2-3 degrees by 2050, which is likely to result in increased rates of evapotranspiration and a more vigorous hydrological cycle,.  Sea temperatures are expected to become warmer, particularly in the pacific ocean exacerbating and increasing the frequency and severity of. This will have a knck on effect on the el nino southern oscillation, which is likely to occour more frequently and severly. An impact from this is a higher likelihood of delta erosion, the net atmospheric gain in PgU means the seas cannot sequester as much carbon, this impact will be felt strongly by vegetation. Sea levels currently rise by 5mm per annum along the Amazonium delta, increased erosion and flooding are likely to have a substantial impact on the lowest lying areas, potentially destroying coastal mangrove forests. 
Upwards of fourty percent of plant species may become unviable in the Amazonian by 2080, large areas of the evergreen tropical forest may be succeeded by mixed forest and savanna grassland vegetation. 

Furthermore, linking back to the beginning, as the dry season lengthens, an increase in temperature by two to three degrees means
Infertile soils can then no longer sustain plant life even if precipitation increases, 
as the dry season lengthens trees will have more time to dry out, so there is likely to be anincreased incidence of natural forest fires, which further transfers carbon, previously locked in the biosphere

Secondly, this transfer of biospheric store to atmospheric will further exacerbate and superimpose the prior point.



A potential impact of increases in carbon dioxide, through slash and burn ON THE rainforest is taking place in the Amazon rainforest is reduced vegetation.

However, it is now thought that increased amounts of atmospheric co2 means more carbon is available to convert to plant matter through photosynthesis. This extra growth is refrerred to as carbon fertilization. Moreover, the rainforest is incredibly densely populated, some plants cannot compete and are suffocate, with less competition there numbers may increase. However, this extra growth is not boundless, vegetation also requires water, sunlight and nutrients, especialy nitrogen. Plants cannot maxe dna without phosphorus, very cursory viem Without the dense canopy cover, which only permitted 1-3% of light, .means more direct sunlight hits the young vegetatoin, increasing evapotranspiration. The removal of trees dramatically alters the micro climate of one canopy on evapotranspiration, 600 gallons of watre, such that a large scale removal can drastically negatively impact precipitation, which if evapotranspiration exceeds precipitation, flash flooding more likely to wash nutrients.
Increases in the atmospheric carbon store, impact the likelihood of drought *forest fire* and precipitatoin, through deforestation. Previously locked carbon in the *forest fire* 

.PP
Name the potential impact, name the change in the cabron budget, is is a positive/negative feedback? flows, processes, transfers, ues allthese words
Process = Deforestation
Rate of 20,000
Impact: Spatial, Temporal: 20% land lost over 50 years, rate of slowing down?
 Pastoral cattle ranching which directly covers 15% of deforested, 60% in atmosphere from a biospheric store, cows respire contrasted by tree which photosynthesis and sequester carbon. slash and burn cretes, dark soils, as normaly higher temps increased rates of decomposition and uptake of plants mean that natural soil cant sustainable suport.
Monoculture leaches nutrients from soil. after 2 years soil is unusable, a new plot needs to be burned for.
.PP
relatively small contributions to increased carbon dioxide come from deforestation and other land-use change, although the net effect of terrestrial biosphere fluxes is as a sink – approximately an absorption of 2PgC per year
the average increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide from 2003 to 2021 corresponded to 48% of the carbon dioxide emitted by human activity with the remaining 52% removed by the oceans and the terrestrial biosphere.

Carbon budget futures

By 2050, forest die-back because of changing vegetation succession and fire is predicted to result in the amazon regioin becooming a net source of carbon dioxide, rather than a carbon sink, by the year 2050, exacerbating the rate of atmospheric warming.
ok jhttps://dredfern.substack.com/p/the-amazon-rainforest-and-the-carbon-f3://dredfern.substack.com/p/the-amazon-rainforest-and-the-carbon-f3e
MY NOTES:
slash and burn is common in 75% of reported deforestation,

On balance, impacts on the Amazon rainforest are severe. The Amazon, by losing its status as carbon sink, is no longer safeguarded from. However, there are signs of optimism, potential impacts can still be dampened in the shortrun by carbon vegetation, and the long-run allows for new policymakers, primarily President Lula are reversing many of the policies of his predecessor, whichsaw deforestation increase by crack downs on illegal slash and burn. Over recent decades tropical forests j

Talk about  the rainsplash effect, rain reduced microbial activity





When carbon dioxide releases into the atmosphere from the ocean, it creates what is called a positive atmospheric flux. A negative flux refers to the ocean absorbing carbon dioxide. Think of these fluxes as an inhale and an exhale, where the net effect of these opposing directions determines the overall effect.20 Sept 2019

