# _With reference to a hot desert that you have studied, assess the relative importance of different
sources of energy in landscape development_


what does assess mean?
Solary energy can be argued to be the most important source of energy in landscape development, the high angle of incidence 90 degrees means intense,

as evaporation exceeds precipitation

Tropical-like cyclones in the Mediterranean, called 'medicanes' develop only a few tiems a year, temporally their effect compard to year-long wind is weak, this happens usually in late summar and autum. Heavy rain from one such cyclone, Daniel, was hit and sufferend extensive flooding anddamage. On September 10/11 over 100mm of rain fell in the area arouhnd Derna. The long narrow valley called a wadi, which is dry except during the rainy season. The floods caused two human made dams along the wadi to collapse, the failure of the second dam, unleashed floodwater up to seven metues high, .

t can also be said relate back to different sources of energy, scientists say that climate change may have increased the severity of the storm that caused the flooding. Though climate change is most likely making Mediterranean cyclones less common, it is intensifying those that do form.

Dry riverbeds and the parched earth struggles to absorb the heavy rain.

Sometimes the unseasonable rains are enough to transform the hard packed desert floor into a black rock playa nevada desert

However, it is now thought that historically wat

https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&rct=j&opi=89978449&url=https://www.aqa.org.uk/subjects/geography/as-and-a-level/geography-7037/subject-content/physical-geography/hot-desert-systems-and-landscapes%23:~:text%3DSources%2520of%2520energy%2520in%2520hot,%252C%2520erosion%252C%2520transportation%2520and%2520deposition.&ved=2ahUKEwiJp5fB8N2FAxWwZ0EAHSMwBPAQFnoECBAQAw&usg=AOvVaw1yZoybfdkcNhzVRvs5gQue

check the official aqa hot  desert systems and landscapes
