# _Place meaning and identity are simply a reflection of past and present socio-economic characteristics and no attempt by external agencies at rebranding can change this_

## To what extent do you agree with this viewpoint?

Past and present socio-economic characteristics shape both meaning and identity of place; important criteria for determining the success of a rebranding scheme. It's often the case that declining industrial areas give negative of a negative perception and image to outsiders, thus reduces the level of new investment into it. Indeed, many rebranding schemes for such areas seek to change external perceptions, giving a new meaning and identity to their place. I shall consider these issues in the context of the city of Liverpool.

Liverpool has had many identities based on its past socio economic activities. In the 18th and 19th centuries, it was a huge port built around trade to the USA and elsewhere, including strong links to the transatlantic slave trade. Many of the prestigious buildings in the city such as the Walker Art Gallery, and street names such as Penny lane are linked to the slave trade. In the 1960s Liverpool mas a leader of popular culture, linked to the Beatles and other bands but in the late 20th century it was badly affected by industrial decline. In the 1980s Liverpool experienced economic and social deprivation along with high levels of crime and vandalism - creating a very negative image and meaning to the outside world.

Since the 1980s there have been several external approaches to regenerating the city which have soucht to radically change its image - to rebrand it. After race riots in 1981 in Toxteth, the Merseyside Development Corporation set about reclaiming 4km2 of derelict land by creating new housing and thousands of new jobs in the city. The first flagship regeneration project in Liverpool was the Albert Dock, a former derelict dock that was opened as a tourist attraction in 1988, including a museum dedicated to the slave trade. The Albert Dock was and is popular and is widely seen as a success.

Since 2003, when Liverpool was awarded the status of European Capital of Culture 2008, a key move by an external agency, the city centre has been transformed by major investment. With nearly 4 GBP billion invested in regeneration, including from overseas, the citys economy has been boosted by an annual 800 million pounds of additional income, all aimed at rebranding the city's identity. It's interesting to note that the same team that delivered the Capital of Culture were behind the succesful bid for the Eurovision Song Contest in 2023. 

More recently, there has been a 200 million development of 'New Chinatown' the project is centered along Great George Street, close to the location of the existing Chinese community in the city and within sight of the Anglican Cathedral. The devolopment includes over 800 apartments, over 150,000ft2 of commercial and retail space and a new high-cass hotel and luxry spa. The external developers of the project, North Point Global said that it would transform 'Europes oldest Chinese community' and its designs were presented to the delegation of the Chinese president Xi Jinping when he visited Manchester in 2015. Much backing for the project comes from Chinese investment partners some based in Hong Kong. From a UK perspective the scheme was vaunted as an example of the 'Northern Powerhouse' project a key national rebranding within the UK.
