# Never expected always appreciated

My Monero wallet (preferred) is,
`
4Aj7U7GMQVci5k7Gnp3fzb5z2pKQFrXcF3nbCvYoosHxbtAWM3xYnWn1WEMZZYK2Ha5pk5sxid2m8PvZ28SmHpRj5DF2qjj`

# Server Upkeep

Running this server itself is cheap as chips.

Costs after running for a week

This is fine - for now… But to be in line with FOSS I intend on buying a coreboot/libreboot compatible NASM, for all my self hosting.
Liturgical Arts

# Liturgical arts

Buying pigments, brushes, gold leaf all make a small dent in my wallet if you'd like to sponsor this journey donations are incredibly appreciated
Pay through…

My Monero wallet (preferred) is,
4Aj7U7GMQVci5k7Gnp3fzb5z2pKQFrXcF3nbCvYoosHxbtAWM3xYnWn1WEMZZYK2Ha5pk5sxid2m8PvZ28SmHpRj5DF2qjj

My PayPal is kamikazechrist@gmail.com
Lastly…

As of right now, I'm unable to cover all these future sunk costs. So donations are appreciated if you found any of the things my site covers worthwhile consuming. I will never paywall the teensiest bit of information. Having said all this, I want to give back to patrons, be it in providing a gratuity item or service. I'm thinking of producing hand-drawn Orthodox symbols for iconography patrons, (image to be inserted) and an appropriate give-back to server donors.

# Donate to THESE PEOPLE

If, after seeing all the coverage omputer-related stuff I do, you'd like to donate - I highly advise you to first give back to original developers of XYZ software, you can find my list of software projects worth donating to here. Myself - lastly - if you feel I've done a good job explaining things.

This isn't an exhaustive list and I may have missed a few - in any case you can simply search said software/projects name with &ldquo;donation&rdquo;

Also, tip-offs/corrections are appreciated! If you know a good resource for anything I talk about here or spot a mistake and can donate your time, in telling me that helps me a lot.

Thank you and God Bless!
