# _Female characters are innocent victims of male power_

## Introduction

In the tragic play, _Othello_, &ldquo;female characters [being] innocent victims of male power&rdquo; is a narrative under scrutiny. An affirmative reading of this argues victimhood and innocence can jointly be described as an interplay between purity and suffering, where characters like Desdemona, possesing moral integrity are subject to male power like Othello. Yet, the spectrum of these terms is far from monolithic. Another affirmative view, takes into record, naivete as a key qualifier for innocence, which becomes a vulnerability, exploited unjustly by men leading to female victimization. Yet an opposing textual reading acknowledges the weight personal decisions of female characters have on the narrative, which makes it difficult to wholly attribute innocence and victimhood. This essay, will examine said textual readings, closely tieing in the understandings of &apos;innocence&apos; and &apos;victimhood&apos; through the lens of tragedy to better answer the title queestion.

## Paragraph 1

Firstly, spousal abuse in Desdemona's marriage exemplifies the affirmative view. Othello striking Desdemona publically, not only asserrts his authority over her, it also serves to silence her plea to reason, &ldquo;Why, sweet Othello!&rdquo;. The public nature of it humiliates Desdemonaa but signals to the others on stage hsi level of marital control. In addition, her physical response to &apos;weep&apos; encapsulates her victimhood from the pain inflicted upon her. Furthermore, if read through a feminist reading, his striking paints a picture of domestiic abuse, better spotlighting Desdomona as a victim through a contemporary set of lens.& 
Moreover, in the next act away from Othello it is revealed that &ldquo;cannot weep&rdquo; and that &ldquo;nor answers have I none&rdquo;, this is crucial for defending the narrative as her inability to prevent Othellos actions directed towards her paints her as defencless, also lacking all agency to refute the untruthful claims, which further underscores the imbalance of power in the marital dynamics. Alongside this, her passive acceptance of mistreatment TALK ABOUT HER MORAL INTEGRITY, talk about submissiveness and docility in introduction, tis meet i should be used so very meet, demonstrates her resignation to fate and subtwission to male dominance, the repetion of meet suggests she is all too aware of whe social expectiation, feministic reading, perhaps indcitaing hder internalisation of societal expectations. Furthermore, her comparison of herselg to a child is thil actuallf child check , he might have child me so, for so in good faith, i am a child to chidinf reinfoces her innoncence , by admittinfg she is a child in the face of othellos reprimandfing revealing her lack of agency and autonomy within the relationshhip








## Paragraph 2
A richer understanding may be found in the notion that Shakespeare invites the audience to share in collective pathos, as they recognise the abuse his treatment  as unjust and his accusations as baseless , cementing her as an innocent victim, 

Moreover, her weeping can be read into the aforementioned weeping, she does this not out of guilt of wronghoing. Explain this point more.

## Conclusion

Through their agency female characters willingly participated in actions which led to &ldquo;male power&rdquo; directed towards them, yet whether this would have happened if male characters werent so...

Oposing extual readings acknowledg 




